The Joe Rogan experience.
And one of the things I'm trying to do with, uh,
this is your mind on plants is start that post drug war conversation about
drugs, which is one of the reasons I included caffeine, you know,
a totally legal drug that everybody uses. Um,
what does that have to teach us in, in a way,
one of the most powerful drug experiences I've had in my life life was the first
cup of coffee. After three months off, really?
It was psychedelic really was incredible. Yeah. Come on, try it,
try getting off caffeine three months, three months without caffeine.
How am I gonna do a podcast? <laugh> you may have to take a hiatus.
I'm gonna run out of things to talk about. I'll fall asleep. It was really hard.
I did it actually. It's a suggestion of rolling Griffin who, uh, you know,
the psychedelic researcher mm-hmm <affirmative> who before that was the world's
leading expert on caffeine.
Um, and, uh,
and I was interviewing him about caffeine for this chapter and he said, well,
you're never gonna understand your relationship to caffeine until you get off
it. So it was kind of a dare and it was really hard.
It was one of the hardest things I've done really. Oh,
I was a mess for how long? Three months.
<laugh> <laugh> you were mess until you, I was functional after a month.
Um, the first week I was not functional at all,
I felt like I had contracted a D D Hmm.
I could not stay on track everything.
The periphery just kept intru on my thinking. I couldn't write, I mean,
writing is the most linear thing you can do. Right, right. And you,
and it's all about concentration obviously. And, um, and I couldn't concentrate.
And I, I felt like there was this veil between me and reality that, you know,
I was not quite seeing, getting feeling,
and it was weird. I didn't feel my self for the whole time. And,
and I thought, what does that mean?
It means yourself is caffeinated <laugh> <laugh>.
And, and that is baseline consciousness for me and for many people.
And that's not a bad thing, but I think we have a debt to these plants that we,
we owe them. Um <affirmative>. And so I spent a lot of time in that,
researching that chapter,
looking back in history for when caffeine enters the west.
And it doesn't happen until the 1650s in Europe.
So we actually have a before and after which we don't with a lot of drugs,
cuz they just go back, you know, millennia. Um,
and before caffeine and it was a very different world and a very different
consciousness.
People were drunk a lot of the time buzzed almost all of the time.
People drank morning, noon and night because it was safer than water.
Right. Water was really how you got diseases.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> if you fermented things even low, you know, low alcohol,
it killed a lot of the mic CROs. Um, so people,
even kids you gave your kids hard cider for breakfast. Um wow. And, uh,
and this was true in America up until the 18 hundreds up until prohibition. Um,
but anyway, um, caffeine comes along in the 1650s and,
and tea and chocolate and coffee all arrive in the same decade in England,
which kind of like great decade. Right. And, um, uh,
and things starts to change in the form of coffee, coffee and tea and chocolate,
which also has caffeine in it. And uh.
So what would the dead never experience coffee before the 16 hundreds? That's.
Right. They had in the Arab world, they'd had it,
they'd had it from like 1200 or something like that.
Supposedly it was discovered in eight hundreds by a herder in like Ethiopia
who noticed that his goats were getting very frisky when they ate this
particular Berry and would stay up all night. And so he, yeah,
so he kind of like started experimenting or he brought it to these monks and
they made a drink and it's like, Ooh, it makes sense.
That, uh, it was in the Arab world.
Cuz if you think about all the science that was being done in the Arab world,
all the literature back then. So all.
The writing one theory is that the Arab world had coffee first and had this
incredible golden age. Yes. And they is an historian of, of, um,
psychoactives named, uh,
Wolfgang Shivel Bush and he correlates name isn't that wonderful German.
Of course <laugh> Wolfgang sh Bush. It's a great book.
It's called taste of paradise, highly recommend it. Um, and he said,
this was the perfect drug for the culture that invented mathematics <laugh> and
had this incredible. Um, and it helped the culture in two ways.
One was as safe as alcohol made water boiling,
it made it much safer. And coffee and tea,
of course both required boiling water, no one ate a drink, boiling water,
uh, or hot beverages before.
So this gave this incredible public health boost to these place. Mm.
And then you have the drug that basically fosters a kind of more linear,
rational, focused way of thinking.
And so there is a lot of evidence linking, um,
coffee and tea consumption with the enlightenment in France and with the age of
reason in England and people in the 1600 started writing about it.
So I was like, wow, people, you know,
we have this new civil and sober drink that we, that,
and it was so popular cuz it was new that people drank less and they used more
caffeine.
And that I think makes possible things like the industrial
revolution because you know, when you're,
when you're doing physical labor outdoor, which was most of history, right?
You could be buzzed. You didn't have to know what time it was.
You worked from sun up to sun down,
there were beer breaks actually on farms in England. Uh,
they would give you beer cuz it gave you calories and made you happy. Um,
but when you start moving into like running machines and doing double
entry bookkeeping, you need a clearer head.
And when you start moving toward night shifts and overnight shifts,
you couldn't do that without caffeine. And that's when it begins.
There's a whole new, like it freed us from the rhythms of the sun,
which dictated everything in Western culture. You worked, you could only work,
Tillen went down. Um, so it had a profound effect on capitalism,
the rise of capitalism and the clearest illustration of that,
that I came across is the coffee break. Where did that come from?
The coffee break actually has a history. We,
the company that came up with it and it was a,
a neck time manufacturer in Denver called wigwam weavers
really. And wigwam weavers, uh, made these very intricate silk neck ties.
And during world war II,
they lost all their best loom operators to the war effort.
So they hired these old guys to do it, you know,
who weren't getting drafted and they couldn't do it very well.
Then they hired these women to do it and they could do it beautifully.
And there were very intricate patterns, very complicated looms. I mean,
you've seen how they, you know, the patterns on neckties and um,
the women could do it really well, but only for about four or five hours.
So they called a, a meeting and the owners said to the workers,
what could we do? We have to improve, uh, your efficiency and you know,
we need more output. And the women said, well, give us a coffee break. Um,
they didn't call it that initially. And um,
give us some time at like 10 in the morning and four in the afternoon and give
us some coffee and tea.
So we started doing it and overnight like their productivity and efficiency goes
out up, ah, quality control goes up and uh,
so he institutes the coffee break and um, think about it.
Your employer gives you a drug and then gives you time off
in which to ingest it during the work day. Yeah. Why would they do that?
Because it contributes might elite.
So the coffee break might seem like it's something your boss is giving you,
but it's a way to extract more value from you.
And I'm sure employees that have little breaks and get to enjoy
just a little bit of free time. They'll be more,
they'll be happier employees. They, oh yeah.
They'll probably be more productive like the, the.
Bezos and he should instant. I don't know if he has coffee breaks.
He wants to be on Adderall.
24, 7 running to the next package. Now tell me about your experience,
what your experience was like with the three months off and then,
then having the caffeine. So I had.
This three months that was really unpleasant. Um,
the only things that were positive about it was I S like a teenager.
It really did improve my sleep. Mm-hmm <affirmative> I had some,
some great sleeps, like I remember from when I was a teenager, you know,
when you can sleep 14 hours mm-hmm <affirmative> um, that was really good.
I also felt, and I'm not proud of this self righteous <laugh> yeah. So,
you know, and I would, I remember, I remember one morning, um,
having to get a 6:00 AM flight and I had to get up and get myself
moving on mint tea <laugh> okay.
And I get to the airport and it's just when they're opening the P the pizzas and
the Starbucks and the line is like sneaking, you know,
for those people getting on 6:00 AM flights,
and I'm looking at these people and they look like junkies, you see,
in Amsterdam <laugh>, they look so pathetic and you know,
that they were hooked and they needed their, they needed their fix. And, um,
and they look kind of miserable and withdrawal was starting,
cuz that first cup of coffee is not about the pleasure.
It gives us it's really about stopping withdrawal symptoms, which are beginning,
overnight, cause you haven't had it for 24 hours. Um,
and I felt self righteous. <laugh> I'm not proud of that cuz I,
and I knew that I was gonna rejoin them as soon as I could. Right.
So when I hit the three month mark, um, I, I do decided,
and I need for the ending of the piece, uh, to have a cup and see,
this was gonna tell me, you know, because drugs are very different.
The first time you take them right before your body is accustomed to them.
So I had this first cup and I gave a lot of thought to where I would have it.
I thought about the original pees is in my neighborhood, the very first pees,
but I don't love their coffee. It's kind, it can be kind of burnt tasting.
And uh, so I went to a place called the cheeseboard,
which is a cafe bakery in my neighborhood. And um,
they have a little pocket park out on the street and I got a cup, uh,
got a special, uh, which is, uh, it's sort of like a cappuccino,
but more CA more, uh, coffee and less milk, like a flat white in, uh, Austin,
Australia. And we sat my wife and I Juda sat there and um,
I drank this drink and it was so good. <laugh>,
I mean,
I just felt these waves of wellbeing and then it turned into euphoria
and um, uh, I was like, wow, this is such a strong drug.
I had no idea it was like cocaine or something. And, um,
and that lasted for maybe 20 minutes,
but then something turned that was kind of interesting across the street.
There was a, um, a garbage truck that was, uh,
grabbing hold of two garbage, you know,
plastic garbage can and shaking them like this and making this horrible racket.
And, uh, and it really got under my,
I was getting kind of irritable and I said to Judith, can we go home? You know?
And, and I felt like I gotta get something done. I felt kind of compulsive. Wow.
And so we walked home and I went to my office and uh,
I just had this desire to get done. And, uh,
so what I did was this is really weird.
I unsubscribe from like a list serves that I was getting on my email that were
really annoying. I just killed them one after another and after another.
And then after I finished that, I, uh, went through the sweater, uh,
in my closet, all the sweaters in my closet <laugh> and I threw out some,
I gave some away and.
I, this sounds like meth behavior <laugh> cause this is what I hear.
I had a friend of mine, I don't know,
data girl was on meth and she always would clean really.
She would come home and organize and clean things. He's like,
so if your girl starts cleaning incessantly, she might be on ahe.
You have a problem.
<Laugh> yeah. I was really compulsive, uh, and very productive. And,
and I said to myself, did.
You keep drinking it throughout the day?
Well, this is no, but I was tempted to,
so I said to myself, how can I hold onto this power that this drug has?
Cuz if I start using it every day, I'm gonna lose it.
I'm just gonna be another caffeine, you know, addict. And, um, and I had,
I came up with this idea, only do it on Saturdays. Oh, once a week.
And I did that for a while. So that very day after cleaning out my closet,
I worked in the garden and, and there were some, um,
plants that needed a replacement. And uh, so I,
I started driving down to this garden center called um, flower land.
And um, and I realized, why did I pick that flower?
Why did I pick that nursery and say, oh,
they have this Airstream where they sell espresso drinks right out in front.
It was like,
it was the voice of the addict putting me in position to get another cup the
same day. And um,
and so I resisted that and I did this Saturday thing for a while and it worked
pretty well. I really look forward to Saturdays and I got a, I got a lot done,
um, on Saturday, on Saturday <laugh>,
But I wasn't addicted anymore. So I could get to the week. Wasn't fine.
It wasn't hard. But then gradually it was like, Hmm. You know, it's Thursday.
And I got a deadline and this would really help me get over the,
so I, so I started making exceptions. It was complete addict thinking.
Right. Did you try any other forms of caffeine? Um.
I would, yeah, I would.
I would do green tea as I'm drinking now mm-hmm <affirmative> as a kind of green
tea is a very good, um, source of caffeine cuz it's really, even,
there's another ALO in it that stretches out the effect. Um,
so you don't get of jolt, but it kind of keeps you nicely titrated.
What is the caffeine, uh, content of green tea, the average cup. It.
It, it's probably a third of what you get in a cup of coffee. Um,
it varies amazingly. Like if the, if the tips were, uh, plucked, you know,
when they're brand new, you know,
first flush green tea that has a lot more cat caffeine and,
and is a lot more valuable. So there's a lot of variables that go into it.
The plant is producing caffeine of course, as a pesticide. Right.
And that was a whole question I looked at. It was like,
why do plants produce these things that have these effects on our minds?
How did that,
isn't that amazing that a plant could devise a chemical that can unlock
a receptor in your brain. That's astonishing.
Catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe, the experience.